- Start Date: 2022-10-14
- Reference Issues: https://github.com/withastro/astro/issues/4307#issuecomment-1277978007
- Implementation PR: https://github.com/withastro/astro/pull/5291
# Render Content

Created: October 17, 2022 2:05 PM

<aside>

💡 **This RFC compliments our [Content Schemas RFC](https://github.com/withastro/rfcs/blob/content-schemas/proposals/0027-content-schemas.md).** We recommend reading that document first to understand the goals of “Content” as a concept, and where “render content” fits into that story.

</aside>

Render Content is a new way to render Markdown and MDX content without resource bleed (i.e. styles) between documents.

# Background

There are two major challenges Astro has addressed since the project’s early days:

1. I want a **landing page** with links to a set of routes in a directory. Say, a list of all URLs in `src/pages/blog/`
2. I want to **generate routes dynamically** from all posts in a given directory. Say `src/posts/*` 👉 `src/pages/[posts]`

Since migrating to Vite, Astro has leaned into its built-in concept for globbing directories of content: `import.meta.glob`. Here’s what that API will output, using both the default “lazy” option and the “eager” option:

```tsx
const lazyPosts = await import.meta.glob('./blog/*.md');
/* {
	'./blog/first.md': () => Promise(module),
	'./blog/second.md': () => Promise(module),
} */

const eagerPosts = await import.meta.glob('./blog/*.md', { eager: true });
/* {
	'./blog/first.md': { frontmatter: {...}, rawContent: '# First...',
	'./blog/second.md': { frontmatter: {...}, rawContent: '# Second...',
} */
```

You’ll notice that lazily globbing only yields an object of file names. To access any other information about a given post (including frontmatter), you’ll need to call that `() => Promise(module)` function to import the file. You’ll likely call this function across *all* of your modules when tackling the landing page problem **(1)** or the dynamic routes problem **(2)**.

To make these problems easier to tackle without learning Vite’s nuances, Astro created the `Astro.glob` abstraction. This abstraction is based on the eager example above, but mapping the object to an array of its values. In other words:

```tsx
Astro.glob('stuff') === Object.values(import.meta.glob('stuff', { eager: true }))
```

This makes landing pages and dynamic routes fairly trivial to build:

```tsx
---
// src/pages/index.astro
const posts = await Astro.glob('./blog/**/*.{md,mdx}');
---
<h1>My blog landing page</h1>
<ul>
  {posts.map(post => (
    <li>
			<a href={post.url}>{post.frontmatter.title}</a>
    </li>
  ))}
</ul>
```

```tsx
---
// src/pages/blog/[post].astro
export function getStaticPaths() {
	const posts = await Astro.glob('../../posts/**/*.{md,mdx}');
	return posts.map(post => ({
		params: { post: customMapFileToSlugHelper(post.file) },
		props: { Post: post },
	})
}
const { Post } = Astro.props;
---
<h1>{Post.frontmatter.title}</h1>
<Post />
```

However, there’s a reason that Vite does ***not*** eagerly load by default, which brings us to…

## Where this breaks down

In short, eagerly loading information about every module makes it *tough* to know which resources are actually needed.

Take our landing page example above. We’ll assume that none of the entries `blog/**` have style or component imports… well, except for one pesky file. We’ll call this `blog/comic-sans-is-great.mdx`:

```tsx
import '../comic-sans-override.css';

# My custom post
...
```

```tsx
// comic-sans-override.css
body {
  font-family: 'Comic Sans MS';
}
```

Now that MDX is supported for content authoring, it’s fairly common to pull in one-off styles or components for a given post that aren’t shared by other files. 

However, this poses a problem for our landing page. As you may know, you’re free to render the content of a globbed post (styles, components and all) [using the `Content` component](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#content).

This feature can be a double-edged sword though; Since `Astro.glob` eagerly loads every module, **********it will also inject every module’s imports (namely styles) onto the page where it is globbed.**********

This means, when `index.astro` globs all of our `blog/**` posts, it will now inject `comic-sans-override.css` onto the page as well. This happens whether we *********actually********* use the Content component or not. Yikes!

This is more jarring in our dynamic routes example. Recall that we’re calling `Astro.glob` to get a list of all paths to generate:

```tsx
// [blog].astro
export function getStaticPaths() {
	const posts = await Astro.glob('../../posts/**/*.{md,mdx}');
	return posts.map(post => ({...})
}
```

Since this function is run for every route generated by `[blog]`, it will also inject styles from **every** globbed entry into **********************************************every blog route.**********************************************

```bash
/blog/comic-sans-is-great.mdx #Comic Sans'd
/blog/first.md #Comic Sans'd
/blog/second.md #Comic Sans'd
```

Our blog can’t escape the Comic Sans plague 💀

# Goals ⭐️

- **Fix the style & script bleed problem** inherent to `Astro.glob()`
- **Do not lose the ease-of-use** provided by the `Astro.glob()` API for rendering directories of content.

# Proposal

We need a way to explicitly opt-in to style injection only where needed. To do so, we propose a sister function to called `renderContent`.

Let’s start with rendering a single MDX file from our `src/content` directory:

```tsx
---
// src/pages/first-newsletter.astro
import { fetchContentByEntry, renderContent } from '.astro';

// Fetch frontmatter, id, and slug
const firstNewsletter = await fetchContentByEntry('newsletter', 'first.mdx');
// Fetch full module for rendering with components and style injection
const { Content } = await renderContent(firstNewsletter);
	---
<h1>{firstNewsletter.data.title}</h1>
<Content />
```

In this example:

1. We use `fetchContent` to get a reference to whatever we want to render ([see the Content Schema RFC example](https://github.com/withastro/rfcs/blob/content-schemas/proposals/0027-content-schemas.md#example))
2. We pass this fetched entry to `renderContent`. This **imports** our entry processed through the Vite pipeline to retrieve a `Content` component, and **injects** all component resources (styles and nested island dependencies) onto the page.

<aside>

💡 For step 2 to work in production builds, we will lazy glob all `src/content/` entries using dynamic imports [via a manifest](#a-new-rendercontentmap). This is because we won’t know which entries to bundle until SSR endpoints are run, so we need to prepare all entries in anticipation. Yes, this means build performance will *just* meet the status quo of `Astro.glob`, though it could be optimized in the future.

</aside>

This is more useful when globbing multiple entries. Let’s revisit that `getStaticPaths` example from earlier, this time using `renderContent`:

```tsx
---
// src/pages/blog/[...slug].astro
import { fetchContent, **renderContent** } from '.astro';

export async function getStaticPaths() {
	// fetch all entries from `src/content/blog`
	const blog = await fetchContent('blog');
	return blog.map(entry => ({
		params: { slug: entry.slug },
		**props: { entry },**
	});
}

**const { entry } = Astro.props;
// R**ender the entry used by our given route
**const { Content } = renderContent(entry);**
---
<h1>{entry.data.title}</h1>
<Content />
```

The key difference here: `renderContent` is called on the single entry used by a given route, instead of blindly importing the whole directory’s resources on a given route. Revisiting our Comic Sans nightmare from earlier:

- `src/pages/blog/first` → `renderContent('blog/first.md')` → no resources injected
- `src/pages/blog/second` → `renderContent('blog/second.md')` → no resources injected
- `src/pages/blog/comic-sans-is-great.mdx` → `renderContent('/blog/comic-sans-is-great.mdx')` → comic-sans-override.css injected 👀

# Detailed design

As you might imagine, there’s a bit of trickery needed to selectively add styles and component resources to the page. We’ll offer a high-level overview here ahead of a full PR.

## Flagging `src/content` resources

Currently, we crawl ******every****** module imported by a given page to discover styles and component resources used, and dump all discovered resources into sets of `scripts`, `styles`, and `links`. 

This approach is too naive for our style bleed problem. Instead, we want to flag which resources can be added normally, and which should be deferred until `renderContent` is called.

To do this, we need a special import flag to tell our css crawlers to move all nested resources of that import into a separate bucket.

Pseudo-code for how this may work:

```tsx
function crawlCss(currentModule, discoveredStyles, discoveredSrcContentStyles) {
	const { importedModules } = viteServer.getModuleInfo(currentModule);
	for (const importedModule of importedModules) {
		if (isStyle(currentModule)) {
			if (currentModule.endsWith(SPECIAL_FLAG)) {
				discoveredSrcContentStyles.add(currentModule);
			} else {
				discoveredStyles.add(currentModule);
			}
		}
	}
}
```

## Adding `src/content` resources from `renderContent`

Once we’ve pulled our `src/content` resources for later, we need to inject these resources onto the page. Today, Astro frontmatter can reach for the `$$result` object to access this.

Our draft implementation injects the following into any **Astro** file that explicitly imports `renderContent`:

```tsx
import { renderContent } from '.astro';
/* Injected */ import { renderContent as $$renderContent } from '.astro';
...
const $$stdin = $$createcomponent(async ($$result, $$props, $$slots) => {
	const Astro = $$result.createAstro($$Astro, $$props, $$slots);
	Astro.self = $$stdin;
	/* Injected */ let renderContent = $$renderContent.bind($$result);
	const userFrontmatterStuff...	
}));
```

Two important pieces here:

- We inject a separate `$$renderContent` import to modify what variables it may access.
- We declare a local variable in the compiled frontmatter, ensuring the variable name matches the named `renderContent` import from the user. This will shadow the user import so we can `bind` the result object for `renderContent` to access.

With this complete, `renderContent` can now update resource sets using, say. `this.links.add(...)`

## A new `renderContentMap`

The Content Schemas proposal [presented a new manifest](https://github.com/withastro/rfcs/blob/content-schemas/proposals/0027-content-schemas.md) generated from `src/content`, stored in a `.astro` directory as a cache. We expect `renderContent` to add a lazy `import.meta.glob` call (see background) so we can avoid loading each module until used.

```tsx
export const renderContentMap = import.meta.glob('src/content/**/*.{md,mdx}', { query: { SPECIAL_FLAG: true } });
```

# `renderContent` API reference

- **************Param:************** `entry: ReturnType<fetchContent> | ReturnType<fetchContent>['id']`
    - Either a complete `fetchContent` return type, or the ID of the entry to render. The ID type is a union of all valid IDs in your `src/content` directory (not a generic string) for better type checking.
- ******************Returns: `{ Content: AstroComponentFactory }`**
    - A `Content` component for use in Astro or MDX files

## Full usage breakdown

```tsx
---
import { fetchContent, renderContent } from '.astro';

// Option 1: renderContent by fetchContent return value
const firstNewsletter = await fetchContent('newsletter', 'first.md');
const { Content } = await renderContent(firstNewsletter);

// Option 2: renderContent by ID
// Useful when the full `fetchContent` return object is not available
const { Content } = await renderContent('newsletter/first.md');
// Or, if you just have an entry ID from a `fetchContent` call:
const { id, slug } = await fetchContent('newsletter', 'first.md');
const { Content } = await renderContent(id);
---

<Content />
```

# Alternatives

The main alternative to `renderContent` would be modifying the internals of `Astro.glob` to similarly differ resource imports until a `Content` component is called. This is certainly possible, but has a 2 main caveats:

- Content Schemas are poised to replace arbitrary globs for Markdown and MDX, for the benefits presented in that RFC. Doubling down on `Astro.glob` for **********rendering********** these documents would likely confuse users, as they’d need to move between glob syntax and collection-based fetching fairly often.
- Focusing on `Astro.glob` would likely expand this RFC’s scope beyond `src/content` to include any directory in your project. This makes an experimental release a bit more unpredictable, and abandoning “safe” directories like `src/content` could close doors for optimization in the future.

# Open questions

- Can and ******should****** we merge `renderContent`'s behavior into `fetchContent`? i.e. making the `Content` component available on all content entries as an async function, rather than using a separate import?
- Can `renderContent` make importing content more performant? i.e. can we explore other avenues to avoid loading content until absolutely necessary, speeding up our MDX processing time to more closely match Markdown?
- Is injecting into compiled code [as presented here](#detailed-design) the best approach for an MVP? Or could our compiler understand `.astro` as a “reserved” import that could modify compiled output safely?