<!--
  Note: You are probably looking for `stage-1--discussion-template.md`!
  This template is reserved for anyone championing an already-approved proposal.

  Community members who would like to propose an idea or feature should begin
  by creating a GitHub Discussion. See the repo README.md for more info.

  To use this template: create a new, empty file in the repo under `proposals/${ID}.md`.
  Replace `${ID}` with the official accepted proposal ID, found in the GitHub Issue
  of the accepted proposal.
-->

**If you have feedback and the feature is released as experimental, please leave it on the Stage 3 PR. Otherwise, comment on the Stage 2 issue (links below).**

- Start Date: 2025-05-13
- Reference Issues: 
- Implementation PR: 
- Stage 2 Issue: https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/issues/1149
- Stage 3 PR: https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/discussions/377

# Summary

Add a new feature that allows Astro scripts and styles to support [Content Security Policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/CSP).

# Example

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
    security: {
        csp: true
    }
})
```

# Background & Motivation

When creating Astro components/layouts with client side scripts, as documented here: [docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/astro-components](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/astro-components/), the processed+bundled scripts are rendered inline in the html of the page, during a production build.
This forces the use of a CSP with script-src: 'unsafe-inline', which is called unsafe for obvious reasons.

It would be nice to have an Astro config option, or a configuration attribute for script tags, to instruct Astro to create a javascript file for the bundled javascript, and then reference that file via a src attribute on the rendered script tag, instead of inlining the bundled javascript.

(During development npm run dev the processed javascript is actually linked via a script src already, making dev builds and production builds behave differently with some content security policies).

The same could be done for stylesheets, making it configurable whether the stylesheet is inlined in the page (requiring style-src unsafe-inline), or included via a link.

# Goals

- Support at least one solution (`nonce`, hash, etc.) that would support CSP.
- Allow Astro scripts (client islands, server islands, view transitions, etc.) and Astro styles to work out of the box.
- Update adapters to support the feature, if needed.
- Make the feature opt-in, even when it's outside experimental.
- Support the [dev server](#dev-server) (stretch)
- View transitions (limited/opt-in support)

# Non-Goals

- Provide *multiple* solutions to fix the same problem
- Support for third-party scripts dynamically imported by users e.g. `document.createElement("script")`, `import("https://path.to/script.js")`;
- Support for third-party styles dynamically imported by users.
- Performance. Users and authors are willing to overlook possible performance drawbacks in order to increase security.


# Detailed Design

## Solution adopted

Contrary to other frameworks of the same ecosystem, our solution will rely on generating [**hashes of styles and scripts**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/CSP#hashes). For more information, please refer to the [alternatives](#alternatives) section.

Astro provides the hashes during the rendering phase. These hashes will served differently based on different cases:
- For static pages, they will be served in the `<head>` tag using the `<meta http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy">` meta tag.
- For dynamic pages, they will be served in the `content-security-policy` header of the `Response`.

A [new adapter feature](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/adapter-reference/#adapter-features) will be provided, called `staticHeaders`. For adapters that support this feature, Astro **won't** serve the hashes for *static pages*`.

Instead, Astro will return those hashes in a form of mapping inside the hook `astro:build:generated`, and adapters can read this mapping and use their 
hosting headers capabilities to create a configuration file.

The mapping is defined as `Map<IntegrationResolvedRoute, Headers>`, and it's the list of **static routes**, where:
- `IntegrationResolvedRoute` is the route type provided to the integrations;
- `Headers` is the `Headers` type that is computed when rendering a static page. Adapters can retrieve the headers they need. Among them, `content-security-policy` e.g. `"script-src: 'self' sha256-yadayada; style-src: 'self' sha256-yadayada`

Astro will still serve the CSP hashes of the dynamic pages, due to the nature of certain features such as Server Islands.

## Generation of hashes

The hashes will be generated using the [`crypto`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Crypto) global object, and the package [`@oslojs/encoding`](https://encoding.oslojs.dev/). Astro *already uses* this package to encrypt props for server islands.

Hashes will be generated using the `SHA-256` algorithm, by default. However, users can change the algorithm via configuration.

## Known scripts and styles

When using client islands, Astro injects **known** styles (Astro island) and scripts (Astro island and directives). These assets are known at build time, so Astro calculates the hashes at build time and stores them in the manifest. The rendering engine will just read and render them.

## `ClientRouter` (AKA view transitions)

The client router has some complex logic to accommodate many use cases. Some of those use cases involve the swapping of scripts during the transition from one page to another.

The swapping of scripts is restricted in CSP, and can only be allowed using the [`strict-dynamic`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/CSP#the_strict-dynamic_keyword) directive.

We might enable the client router only via configuration.

```js
export default defineConfig({
	security: {
		csp: {
			strictDynamic: true
		}
	}
})
```

We want to expose a configuration because sometimes it's very easy to miss the usage of `ClientRouter`, while an explicit configuration will work for the `ClientRouter` **and** userland scripts. We don't want to enable a directive **implicitly** without the user's consent.

## Server Islands

Server islands are very dynamic because the contents of their rendered scripts depend on `props` and `slots`. Due to this requirement, the server islands must support head propagation. The compiler will ensure that the correct metadata is emitted.

The hashes **will be generated during the rendering phase**. The performance hit is proportional to the number of server islands used in a page.

## User styles

Compiled styles are calculated during the build, and Astro already possesses all the information on the styles imported and rendered by page. During the build, Astro will calculate the hashes of those assets and store them in the manifest. The rendering engine will just read and render them.

## Rendered `<meta>`

The current proposal targets scripts and styles emitted by Astro, so the directives rendered will handle only `style-src` and `script-src`:
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="style-src 'self' 'sha256-hash1'; script-src 'self' 'sha256-hash2'"
>
```
While browsers are able to [merge directives](https://centralcsp.com/articles/csp-meta-tags) from `Response` headers and `meta` tags, Astro will provide runtime APIs so users can push their custom policies based in their requirements.

### Configuration APIs

New configurations will be available in case directives and/or hashes can be applied to all pages

```js
export default defineConfig({
    security: {
        csp: {
            // Allows to enable dynamic of tags via JS
            strictDynamic: true,
            // or SHA-384, or SHA-256 (default)
            algorithm: "SHA-512",
            // Additional directives added to the final content
            directives: [
                "default-src 'self'", 
                "img-src 'self'",
            ],
            // customise the `style-src` directive
            styleDirective: {
                // A list of resources that will override the default resources of Astro
                resources: [
                    "self",
                    "https://css.cdn.example.com",
                ],
                // List of hashes for `style-src`. 
                hashes: [
                    "sha512-hash1",
                    "sha256-hash1",
                    "sha384-hash1",
                ]
            },
            // customise the `style-src` directive
            scriptDirective: {
                // A list of resources that will override the default resources of Astro
                resources: [
                    "self",
                    "https://scripts.cdn.example.com",
                ],
                // List of hashes for `script-src`. 
                hashes: [
                    "sha512-hash1",
                    "sha256-hash1",
                    "sha384-hash1",
                    
                ]
            }
        }
    }
})
```

#### Provide additional directives

User can add additional directives to control other resources other than `script-src` and `style-src`.

These directives is a list of strings. Each string has this form

```ts
type CspDirective = `${AllowedDirectives} ${string}`;
```

Where `AllowedDirectives` is a list of the following directives:

```ts
export const ALLOWED_DIRECTIVES = [
	'base-uri',
	'child-src',
	'connect-src',
	'default-src',
	'fenced-frame-src',
	'font-src',
	'form-action',
	'frame-ancestors',
	'frame-src',
	'img-src',
	'manifest-src',
	'media-src',
	'object-src',
	'referrer',
	'report-to',
	'require-trusted-types-for',
	'sandbox',
	'trusted-types',
	'upgrade-insecure-requests',
	'worker-src',
] as const;
```

Here's an example where we add `default-src` directive and `img-src` directive:

```js
export default defineConfig({
    security: {
        csp: {
            // Additional directives added to the final content
            directives: [
                "default-src 'self'",
                "img-src 'self' https://images.cdn.example.com"
            ]
        }
    }
})
```

Will result in something similar to the following (the result is formatted to allow better readability):

```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="
    default-src 'self';
    img-src 'self' https://images.cdn.example.com;
    style-src 'self' 
    'sha256-AstroCalculatedHash'
    script-src 'self' 
    'sha256-AstroCalculatedHash';
 "
>
```

#### Customize the `script-src` and `style-src` directives

Since Astro **needs** full control over `script-src` and `style-src`, users shouldn't manipulate them.

However, via configuration, users can customize it by adding additional hashes and where resources can be loaded. 

By default, Astro will always add `'self'` as allowed remotes, however passing additional directives will **override** the defaults.

Providing additional hashes **won't** override the ones generated by Astro, but they will be prepended to the one that Astro usually calculates.

In the following examples, we add additional resources for scripts and styles, as well as additional hashes that were calculated by the user:

```js
export default defineConfig({
    security: {
        csp: {
            styleDirective: {
                // A list of resources that will override the default resources of Astro
                resources: [
                    "https://css.cdn.example.com",
                ],
                // List of hashes for `style-src`. 
                hashes: [
                    "sha512-hash1",
                    "sha256-hash1",
                    "sha384-hash1",
                ]
            },
            scriptDirective: {
                // A list of resources that will override the default resources of Astro
                resources: [
                    "https://scripts.cdn.example.com",
                ],
                // List of hashes for `script-src`. 
                hashes: [
                    "sha512-hash1",
                    "sha256-hash1",
                    "sha384-hash1",

                ]
            }
        }
    }
})
```


Which will result in a content similar to the following (the result is formatted to allow better readability):

```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="
    style-src https://css.cdn.example.com
    'sha512-hash1'
    'sha256-hash1'
    'sha384-hash1'; 
    'sha256-AstroCalculatedHash'
    script-src https://scripts.cdn.example.com
    'sha512-hash1'
    'sha256-hash1'
    'sha384-hash1'
    'sha256-AstroCalculatedHash';
 "
>
```


### Runtime APIs

The following paragraph will describe possible runtime APIs that users can use to customise their CSP policies. When `Astro.` is used, it's intended that also `APIContext` is covered by the implementation.

#### `Astro.insertDirective(directive: CspDirective)`

Users can add an entire directive. Astro won't check if the directive is grammatically correct.

```js
Astro.insertDirective(`image-src ${Astro.site}`)
```
Result
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="image-src https://example.com; style-src 'self' 'sha256-hash1'; script-src 'self' 'sha256-hash2'"
>
```

#### `Astro.insertStyleHash(string)`

```js
Astro.insertStyleHash("'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'")
```
Result
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="style-src 'self' 'sha256-hash1' 'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'; script-src 'self' 'sha256-hash2'"
>
```


#### `Astro.setStyleResource(string)`

```js
Astro.setStyleResource("https://styles.cdn.example.com")
```
Result
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="style-src https://styles.cdn.example.com 'sha256-hash1' 'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'; script-src 'self' 'sha256-hash2'"
>
```


#### `Astro.insertScriptHash(string)`

```js
Astro.insertScriptHash("'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'")
```
Result
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="style-src 'self' 'sha256-hash1'; script-src 'self' 'sha256-hash2' 'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'"
>
```

#### `Astro.setScriptResource(string)`

```js
Astro.setScriptResource("https://scripts.cdn.example.com")
```
Result
```html
<meta 
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="style-src 'self' 'sha256-hash1' 'sha256-qewpiorfuvng3'; script-src https://scripts.cdn.example.com 'sha256-hash2'"
>
```


# Testing Strategy

Types of tests:
- unit tests
- integration tests
- e2e tests

Features to test:
- client islands
- server islands
- view transitions
- external scripts (via APIs)
- external styles (via APIs)
- inline scripts
- inline styles

# Drawbacks

The hashes solution will negatively impact the rendering engine because Astro will have to calculate the hashes **at runtime**. The most expensive solution is the support of server islands because the contents of their scripts depend on props and slots, which are only known during the rendering phase.

However, users are willing to compromise some performance penalties for security.

## Dev server

`vite` works differently in dev and prod. In dev, all assets (scripts and styles) are inlined, and also replaced using HRM. After the build, these assets are bundled, minified and imported differently.

Due to this significant discrepancy, supporting the dev server will be very difficult, so we will focus on the build first.

# Alternatives

## The `nonce` solution

This solution is way **easier** to implement; however, it won't work for static pages (SSG).
As highlighted in this [comment of mine](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/issues/1149#issuecomment-2824552131), in order to provide the `nonce` header, a user would need to use **an edge function** in a serverless environment or middleware for server environments. This means that environments that don't provide any virtual host control (e.g. GitHub pages, etc.), the solution wouldn't work *at all*.

This solution doesn't follow Astro core principles, where an Astro site should work *out of the box* with the majority of environments, especially SSG, which is a first-class citizen for us.


# Adoption strategy

- The usage of this feature will be under an experimental flag, and shipped in a minor:

  ```js
  export default defineConfig({
      experimental: {
          csp: true
      }
  })
  ```

- The new Astro feature will be shipped with prefix `_exprimental`: `_experimentalStaticHeaders` in a patch release.
- The new field of the hook `astro:build:generated` will be shipped with prefix `_experimental`: `_experimentalRouteToHeaders` in a patch release.

After a period of trial and test with existing Astro functionalities, the experimental flag will be removed.

The feature will always be **opt-in**.

# Unresolved Questions
